



                                  THE
                           KANSAS UNIVERSITY
                           SCIENCE BULLETIN.
                     Vol. I, No. 7—September 1902.
                    (Whole Series, Vol. XI, No. 7.)

                                CONTENTS:

 COAL MEASURES FAUNAL STUDIES, II (Beede and Rogers)—FAUNA OF THE SHAWNEE
     FORMATION (Haworth), THE WABAUNSEE FORMATION (Prosser), and THE
                   COTTONWOOD LIMESTONE, _J. W. Beede_.


                       PUBLISHED BY THE UNIVERSITY,

                              LAWRENCE, KAN.


                     Price of this number, 25 cents.

      Entered at the post-office in Lawrence as second-class matter.




                  KANSAS UNIVERSITY SCIENCE BULLETIN.


 VOL. I, NO. 7.             SEPTEMBER, 1902.     { WHOLE SERIES,
                                                 { VOL. XI, NO. 7.




                   COAL MEASURES FAUNAL STUDIES, II.

                 (BY J. W. BEEDE AND AUSTIN F. ROGERS.)


               FAUNA OF THE SHAWNEE FORMATION (HAWORTH),
                   THE WABAUNSEE FORMATION (PROSSER),
                       THE COTTONWOOD LIMESTONE.

                            BY J. W. BEEDE.

Being a continuation of the foregoing lists of Rogers, published in this
journal, vol. IX, No. 4, pp. 232–254.[1]

The present paper deals with the fauna of the rocks, beginning at the
base of what Haworth has called the “Shawnee formation”[2] and
continuing upward to the top of the Cottonwood limestone. The strata are
treated in ascending order. It must be borne in mind that it is the
object of these papers to bring out the fauna of the rocks of the Kansas
Coal Measures in sufficient detail to establish time divisions on a
paleontological basis. These lists are, of course, incomplete for the
horizons _in toto_, but it is hoped that they do give the characteristic
fossils of the rocks of the Kansas river section in sufficient fulness
to warrant some deductions of value. The fauna of the Lower Coal
Measures still remains to be completed.


=20.= KANWAKA SHALES (Adams MSS., by permission U. S. Geological
Survey). Bennett’s description:[3] “Above the last (Oread) limestone
lies a heavy shale deposit, at least ninety-seven feet thick at
Lecompton. The lower sixty-five feet of this is a clay shale, then
sixteen feet of arenaceous shale, then five feet of sand rock, above
which lies eleven feet of sandy buff shales.” No fossils known from this
horizon.


=21.= LECOMPTON LIMESTONE. Bennett’s description: “Capping the hills
around Lecompton is a five-foot limestone in two layers, which we will
provisionally name the ‘Fusulina’ limestone; not that it alone bears
that fossil, but because of the abundance of _Fusulina_ in it. It is the
lower of another triple system [formation] of limestones, the members of
which are separated by a few feet of shale, and which retain this order
as far as observed to the west. Above the ‘Fusulina’ stratum are five
and one-half feet of clay shales, then one and one-fourth feet of blue
limestone, which weathers dark buff, like all its associate strata.
Above this are four feet of shales having a bituminous streak in the
middle; then ten feet of light gray, easily disintegrated limestone.
This group [formation] may be called the Lecompton limestone, on account
of their outcropping being near Lecompton. At Spencer, six miles west of
Lecompton, the upper part of the series [formation] finally disappears
below the alluvial soils of the valley.”

From near the horizon of the above formation, from a well in the road in
the bed of Deer creek (the one emptying into Wakarusa creek), near the
Shawnee-Douglas county line, the following species have been collected:

_Fusulina secalica_ (Say).

_Campophyllum torquium_ Owen.

_Archæocidaris_ cf. _agassizi_ Hall.

_Fenestella limbata_ Foerste.

_Fenestella limbata remota_ Foerste.

_Pinnatopora_ sp.

_Polypora distincta_ Ulrich?

_Polypora elliptica_ Rogers? It is quite probable that this is a
distinct species. It has fenestrules arranged in two intersecting series
when viewed on the reverse side, and the branches are not striated. The
fenestrules appear nearly square on account of their arrangement, but in
reality they are subcircular. On the obverse side the nodes are very
prominent and some of them appear to possess acanthopores.

_Polypora_ cf. _nodocarinata_ Ulrich.

_Rhombopora lepidodendroides_ Meek.

_Chonotes granulifer_ Owen.

_Productus nebraskensis_ Owen.

_Productus pertenuis_ Meek.

_Reticularia perplexa_ (McChesney) Schuchert.

_Seminula argentia_ (Shepard) Hall.

_Spirifer cameratus_ Morton.

_Aviculopecten carboniferus_ (Stevens) Meek.

_Aviculopecten maccoyi_ Meek and Hayden.

_Aviculopecten occidentalis_ (Shumard) White.

_Limopteria gibbosa_ (Meek and Worthen).


=22.= TECUMSEH SHALES. A stratum of shales about seventy-five feet in
thickness, nearly non-fossiliferous, of fine texture, containing
abundant ferruginous concretions and occasional layers of soft shaly
sandstone. According to Bennett, these may represent the Kanwaka
shales.[4]


=23.= DEER CREEK LIMESTONE.[4] Three layers of limestone separated by
layers of shale. The total thickness of the formation is fifteen to
twenty-five feet. The principal stratum is the uppermost, which is from
seven to twelve feet thick. Most of the fossils below are collected from
this upper layer. It is a massive, light gray limestone, tinged with
yellow. The texture often varies much in a short distance, grading into
inclusions or banks of blue argillaceous limestone in which the fossils
are excellently preserved. It is best exposed at Calhoun’s Bluffs, in
the cut of the Union Pacific railroad three miles northeast of Topeka.

_Fusulina secalica_ (Say).

_Lophophyllum profundum_ (Milne-Edwards and Haime) Foerste.

_Archæocidaris agassizi_ Hall.

_Oligoporus minutus_ Beede.

_Crinoid_ stems.

_Fenestella hexagonalis_ Rogers?

_Fenestella_ sp.

_Pinnatopora pyriformis_ Rogers.

_Polypora distincta_ Ulrich? Probably a new species. It differs from
this species in having fenestrules broader and shorter and slightly more
slender branches. However, this may be due in a large part to the
particular portion of the zoarium of which our specimens are fragments.

_Polypora nodocarinata_ Ulrich.

_Septopora pinnata_ Ulrich.

_Ambocœlia planoconvexa_ (Shumard) Hall and Clarke.

_Chonetes granulifer_ Owen.

_Crania modesta_ White?

_Derbya crassa_ (Meek and Hayden) Waagen.

_Derbya keokuk_ (Hall and Clarke).

_Dielasma bovidens_ (Morton) White.

_Enteletes hemiplicata_ (Hall) Hall and Clarke.

_Meekella striaticostata_ (Cox) White and St. John.

_Productus cora_ d’Orbigny.

_Productus costatus_ Sowerby? de Koninck.

_Productus longispinus_ Sowerby.

_Productus nebraskensis_ Owen.

_Productus pertenuis_ Meek.

_Productus punctatus_ (Martin) Morton.

_Productus semireticulatus_ (Martin) d’Orbigny.

_Pugnax utah_ (Marcou) Hall and Clarke.

_Reticularia perplexa_ (McChesney) Schuchert.

_Seminula argintia_ (Shepard) Hall and Clarke.

_Spirifer cameratus_ Morton.

_Spiriferina cristata_ (Schlotheim) Dawson.

_Allorisma granosum_ (Shumard) Keyes.

_Allorisma subcuneatum_ Meek and Hayden.

_Aviculopecten occidentalis_ (Shumard) Meek and Hayden.

_Aviculopecten_ sp.

_Entolium aviculatum_ (Swallow) Meek.

_Myalina kansasensis_ Shumard?

_Myalina swallowi_ McChesney.

_Pinna peracuta_ Shumard.

_Pinna subspatulata_ Worthen?

_Bellerophon crassus_ Meek and Worthen.

_Trachydomia wheeleri_ (Swallow) Keyes.

_Pleurotomaria tabulata_ Hall.

_Conularia crustula_ White? (Very large for this species.)


=24.= CALHOUN SHALES. This formation is fifty to sixty-five feet in
thickness. The lower part is a layer of soft argillaceous sandstone from
twelve to twenty feet thick. The upper portion of the formation is a
bluish shale, arenaceous below, clayey above, and of comparatively fine
texture. No fossils have been collected from this formation, except a
few fragments of _Calamites_ and _Cordaites_ in a soft sandstone
immediately beneath the Topeka limestone, in the eastern part of that
city. The type exposure is at Calhoun’s Bluffs, three miles northeast of
Topeka.


=25.= HARTFORD (TOPEKA) LIMESTONE. (Adams’s MSS., by permission of U. S.
Geological Survey.) The following section of the rocks is about as given
by Doctor Bennett when he first described them:

                                                                 ft. in.
 _g._ Limestone weathering buff                                    2   0
 _f._ Drab shales                                                  3   0
 _e._ Limestone weathering buff                                    1   6
 _d._ Buff calcareous shales with abundant fossils                 2   0
 _c._ Blue to brown limestone, always weathering to a brown        5   8
        buff, cherty near the top, fossiliferous
 _b._ Blue shales                                                  1   6
 _a._ Blue limestone, weathering dark buff                         6   0
                                                                 --- ---
                  Total thickness of formation                    21   8

Most of the fossils enumerated below were taken from layers _c_ and _d_,
though the entire set is more or less fossiliferous, with about the same
species running through them.

_Fusulina secalica_ (Say).

_Amblysiphonella prosseri_ Clarke.

_Lophophyllum profundum_ (Milne-Edwards and Haime) Foerste.

_Crinoid_ stems and plates, referred by Bennett to _Zeacrinus
mucrospinus_ and _Z. acanthophorus_.

_Archæocidaris agassizi_ Hall.

_Archæocidaris trudifer_ White.

_Worm._

_Fenestella shumardi_ Prout.

_Fenestella remota_ Foerste.

_Polypora elliptica_ Rogers.

_Polypora submarginata_ Meek.

_Rhombopora lepidodendroides_ Meek.

_Septopora biserialis_ (Swallow) Foerste.

_Septopora_ sp.

_Ambocœlia planoconvexa_ (Shumard) Hall and Clarke.

_Chonetes granulifer_ Owen.

_Derbya crassa_ (Meek and Hayden) Waagen.

_Derbya keokuk_ (Hall) Hall and Clarke.

_Dielasma bovidens_ (Morton) White.

_Hustedia mormoni_ (Marcou) Hall and Clarke.

_Meekella striaticostata_ (Cox) White and St. John.

_Orbiculoidea missouriensis_ (Shumard) Hall and Clarke.

_Productus cora_ d’Orbigny.

_Productus costatus_ Sowerby? de Koninck.

_Productus longispinus_ Sowerby?

_Productus nebraskensis_ Owen.

_Productus pertenuis_ Meek.

_Productus punctatus_ (Martin) Morton.

_Productus semireticulatus_ (Martin) d’Orbigny.

_Reticularia perplexa_ (McChesney) Schuchert.

_Seminula argentia_ (Shepard) Hall and Clarke.

_Spirifer cameratus_ Morton.

_Spiriferina cristata_ (Schlotheim) Dawson.

_Allorisma granosum_ (Shumard) Keyes.

_Allorisma subcuneatum_ Meek and Hayden.

_Astartella vera_ Hall.

_Aviculopecten occidentalis_ (Shumard) Meek and Hayden.

_Entolium aviculatum_ (Swallow) Meek.

_Limopteria marian_ (White) Beede?

_Macrodon_ Cf. _tenuistriatus_ Meek and Worthen.

_Macrodon_ sp.

_Myalina swallowi_ McChesney.

_Pinna peracuta_ Shumard.

_Schizodus curtus_ Meek and Worthen.

_Schizodus curtiformis_ Wolcott.

_Schizodus rossicus_ de Verneuil.

_Aclisina swalloviana_ (Geinitz) Meek, and other gastropods too poorly
preserved to be identified.

_Bellerophon carbonarius_ Cox.

_Orthoceras_ sp.

_Griffithides scitula_ (Meek and Worthen) Vogdes.

=26.= SEVERY SHALES. These shales are blue below, varying through yellow
to black in places above the coal. They are fifty to seventy-five feet
in thickness. The texture varies, and in the upper part they contain the
Osage coal, which is mined at Topeka, Burlingame, Osage City, and other
places.

In correlating isolated sections the rocks between the Topeka limestone
and the Barclay (= Burlingame = Wyckoff, etc.) limestone have been
somewhat confused. Under the title, “Stratigraphy of the Kansas Coal
Measures,”[5] Haworth describes them as follows: “Above them (Topeka
limestones) lies another shale bed fifty feet thick, at the top of which
lies the Topeka coal, a seam about eleven inches thick, which has been
mined in different places. The coal is immediately overlaid by two thin
limestone beds, separated by less than three feet of shales. Above the
limestone is the Osage City shale, more than 100 feet thick, at the top
of which is the Osage coal, averaging eighteen or twenty inches
thick.... Above the Osage coal is a thin limestone system [formation],
superseded in turn by the Burlingame shales, a body about 150 feet thick
in the vicinity of Burlingame, and possibly more in places. Both the
Burlingame and Osage City shales extend for long distances to the
southwest and northeast, and are important landmarks in stratigraphy.”
Bennett[6] describes the succession at Topeka correctly, but supposes
the coal above the Topeka coal corresponds to the Osage horizon, instead
of to the one already indicated in this paper as its equivalent.

Haworth’s statement in Vol. I, p. 162, of the Kansas Survey, is
practically a repetition of the one just quoted, but he corrects the
correlation of the coals in a foot-note at the bottom of page 161. In
volume III of the same reports (p. 94) he uses the term “Osage shales”
for all the shales between the Topeka limestone and the Barclay
limestone. The section is correctly given by Hall in his “Section from
Boicourt to Alma,”[7] though it is not clear just what is meant by his
“Osage City Shales, Coal, and Limestone.”

From the foregoing, it will be seen that the terms “Osage City” and
“Burlingame,” when strictly applied, are proposed for one and the same
set of rocks, namely, those above the Osage-Topeka coal, while the
shales below the coal and above the Hartford limestone are not
designated at all. Later, in Vol. III of the University Survey (p. 66),
in quoting Doctor Adams’s notes, Professor Haworth gives the following:
“_Severy Shales._—‘Above the Elk Falls limestone is a bed of shales
averaging fifty to seventy-five feet in thickness, which, with the
protected limestones above, forms a light escarpment that may be traced
from a few miles below Eureka to Cedar valley, forming a line from two
to five miles west of the Elk Falls escarpment. This shale bed is
therefore sufficiently prominent to be recognized in the field, and to
be of considerable local and stratigraphic importance. The town of
Severy lies within it, and therefore it may be called the Severy
shales.’” Dr. George I. Adams, of the United States Geological Survey,
under whose direction the work of correlating the Coal Measures rocks of
Kansas was done last summer, informs me that the names used in this
paper and accredited to him have been passed upon by the committee on
nomenclature, and he has kindly permitted me to use them in advance.

So far as known these shales are not fossiliferous, save for a few
fragments of fern leaves, below the coal, but are very fossiliferous
locally just above it.

_Lophophyllum profundum_ (Milne-Edwards and Haime) Foerste.

_Ceriocrinus craigi_ (Worthen) Wachsmuth and Springer.

_Ceriocrinus harshbargeri_ Beede.

_Ceriocrinus hemisphericus_ (Shumard) Wachsmuth and Springer. These
three species of crinoids are from the dump, and may be from the shales
between the two layers of the Howard limestone above.

_Spirorbis_ sp.

_Fenestella dentata_ Rogers.

_Fenestella limbata_ Foerste.

_Fenestella mimica_ Ulrich.

_Pinnatopora elliptica_ Rogers.

_Polypora whitei_ Foerste.

_Ambocœlia planoconvexa_ (Shumard) Hall and Clarke.

_Chonetes glaber_ Geinitz.

_Chonetes granulifer_ Owen.

_Derbya crassa_ (Meek and Hayden) Waagen.

_Dielasma bovidens_ (Morton) White.

_Hustedia mormoni_ (Marcou) Hall and Clarke.

_Lingula umbonata_ Cox. If this species is considered separate from _L.
mytiloides_, the specimens here referred to would probably be classed
with the latter.

_Productus cora_ d’Orbigny.

_Productus longispinus_ Sowerby.

_Productus nebraskensis_ Owen.

_Productus pertenuis_ Meek.

_Productus semireticulatus_ (Martin) d’Orbigny.

_Productus symmetricus_ McChesney.

_Pugnax utah_ (Marcou) Hall and Clarke.

_Reticularia perplexa_ (McChesney) Schuchert.

_Seminula argentia_ (Shepard) Hall and Clarke.

_Spirifer cameratus_ Morton.

_Spiriferina cristata_ (Schlotheim) Dawson.

_Astartella vera_ Hall.

_Aviculopecten occidentalis_ (Shumard) Meek and Hayden.

_? Aviculopecten whitei_ Meek?

_Cardiomorpha missouriensis_ Shumard?

_Edmondia_ sp.

_? Myalina exasperata_ Beede.

_Myalina perattenuata_ Meek and Hayden.

_Myalina swallowi_ McChesney.

_Nucula ventricosa_ Hall.

_Pleurophorus tropidopherus_ Meek.

_Schizodus curtus_ Meek and Worthen.

_Schizodus_ sp.

_Solenomya radiata_ Meek and Worthen.

_Sedgwickia topekensis_ (Shumard) Meek and Hayden.

_Bellerophon_ Cf. _bellus_ Keyes.

_Euomphalus subrugosus_ (Meek and Worthen) Meek.

_Pleurotomaria perhumerosa_ Meek.

_Pleurotomaria sphærulata_ Conrad.

_Pleurotomaria subdecussata_ Geinitz.

_Orthoceras cribosum_ Geinitz.

_Griffithides scitula_ (Meek and Worthen) Vogdes.

=27.= HOWARD LIMESTONE. This consists of two thin layers of limestone
separated by two to ten feet of shales. The lower of these is a hard,
blue limestone from twenty inches to two feet in thickness, quite
fossiliferous in places, and sometimes quite full of crinoid stems and
of fish teeth. The upper layer is usually coarser and more shaly. The
clay between them is often very fossiliferous.

From Doctor Adams’s notes, published by Professor Haworth,[8] it will be
seen that the Howard limestone is the same as the rock over the Osage
coal, and that his Severy shale is the same as the Osage City shales.

Some of the fossils here listed were collected from ballast near
Lawrence, on the old Carbondale railroad, which was taken from this
layer of rock at Carbondale. These references are marked with an
asterisk.

* _Fusulina secalica_ (Say).

* _Campophyllum torquium_ Owen.

_Lophophyllum profundum_ (Milne-Edwards and Haime) Foerste.

* _Lophophyllum westii_ Beede.

_Ceriocrinus monticulatus_ Beede.

_Erisocrinus megalobrachius_ Beede.

_Scaphiocrinus washburni_ Beede.

_Spirorbis_ sp.

* _Chainodictyon laxum_ Foerste.

_Fenestella dentata_ Rogers.

_Fenestella remota_ Foerste.

* _Fenestella shumardi_ Prout.

_Fistulipora nodulifera_ Meek.

_Pinnatopora pyriformipora_ Rogers?

_Pinnatopora tenuilineata_ (Meek) Ulrich.

_Polypora aspera_ Rogers.

_Polypora elliptica_ Rogers.

* _Polypora_ sp.

_Rhombopora lepidodendroides_ Meek.

_Streblotrypa prisca_ Gabb and Horn.

_Ambocœlia planoconvexa_ (Shumard) Hall and Clarke.

_Chonetes glaber_ Geinitz.

_Chonetes granulifer_ Owen.

_Derbya crassa_ (Meek and Hayden) Waagen.

_Derbya keokuk_ (Hall) Hall and Clarke.

_Dielasma bovidens_ (Morton) White.

_Enteletes hemiplicata_ (Hall) Hall and Clarke.

_Productus cora_ d’Orbigny.

_Productus costatus_ Sowerby? de Koninck.

_Productus longispinus_ Sowerby.

_Productus nebraskensis_ Owen.

_Productus pertenuis_ Meek.

_Productus punctatus_ (Martin) Morton.

_Productus semireticulatus_ (Martin) d’Orbigny.

_Pugnax utah_ (Marcou) Hall and Clarke.

_Seminula argentia_ (Shepard) Hall and Clarke.

_Spirifer cameratus_ Morton.

_Spiriferina cristata_ (Schlotheim) Dawson.

_Allorisma costatum_ Meek and Worthen.

_Allorisma geinitzi_ Meek.

_Allorisma granosum_ (Shumard) Keyes.

_Allorisma kansasensis_ Beede.

_Aviculopecten carboniferus_ (Stevens) Meek.

_Aviculopecten hertzeri_ Meek.

_Aviculopecten maccoyi_ Meek and Hayden.

_Aviculopinna americana_ Meek.

_Edmondia aspenwallensis_ Meek.

_Edmondia nebraskensis_ (Geinitz) Meek.

_Entolium aviculatum_ (Swallow) Meek.

_Lima retifera_ Shumard.

_Limopteria gibbosa_ (Meek and Worthen).

_Macrodon_ cf. _tenuistriata_ (Geinitz) Meek and Worthen.

_Modiola subelliptica_ Meek.

_Myalina kansasensis_ Shumard.

_Myalina swallowi_ McChesney.

_Nucula?_ sp. (cast, very small).

_Nuculana bellistriata attenuata_ Meek var.

_Pinna lata_ Beede.

_Placunopsis carbonaria_ Meek and Worthen.

_? Pseudomonotis hawni equistriata_ Beede var.?

* _Pteria longa_ (Geinitz).

_Schizodus alpina_ (Hall) Keyes.

_Schizodus circulus_ Worthen.

_Schizodus wheeleri_ (Swallow) Meek.

_Yoldia subscitula_ Meek and Hayden.

_Bellerophon carbonaria_ Cox.

_Bellerophon crassus_ Meek and Worthen.

_Bellerophon montfortianus_ Norwood and Pratten.

* _Bellerophon percarinatus_ Conrad.

_Bulimorpha nitidula_ (Meek and Worthen) Keyes.

_Capulus parvus_ Swallow.

_Pleurotomaria illinoiensis_ Worthen? Differs from this species in being
much smaller and in having a larger number of nodes to the whorl. The
notch in the lip extends back some distance as a thin, almost linear
slit.

_Pleurotomaria tabulata_ Conrad.

_Soleniscus_ sp.

_Sphærodoma medialis_ (Meek and Worthen) Keyes.

_Sphærodoma ponderosa_ (Swallow) Keyes?

_Sphærodoma_ sp.

_Strophostylus nana_ (Meek and Worthen) Keyes.

_? Glyphæoceras_ sp. (Two specimens, very small and not so preserved as
to be well identified.)

* _Goniatites subcavus_ Miller and Gurley.

* _Metacoceras sangamonensis_ (Meek and Worthen) Hyatt.

* _Nautilus planovolvis_ Shumard.

_Orthoceras_ Cf. _rushensis_ McChesney. Pittings on part of the surface.

_Solenocheilus_ Cf. _collectus_ Hyatt.

_Stearoceras gibbosum_ Hyatt? Perhaps a young specimen of this species,
though it will probably prove to be different. The cast preserves a fine
line down the center of the ventral surface which disappears before
reaching the deep sinus. The sinus is somewhat shallower than that
figured by Hyatt, and it may be an _Endolobus_.

_Griffithides scitula_ (Meek and Worthen) Vogdes.

=28.= BURLINGAME SHALES. Olive shales, generally very argillaceous,
though arenaceous in streaks, and in places even contain sandstone.
These shales are 120 feet or more in thickness, and for the most part
are not fossiliferous, though in places fossils are very abundant. In
the upper part is the Dover-Silver Lake coal, and above it usually a
layer of impure limestone.

_Chonetes granulifer_ Owen.

_Hustedia mormoni_ (Marcou) Hall and Clarke.

_Lingula umbonata_ Cox. (See previous note to this species.)

_Orbiculoidea missouriensis_ (Shumard) Hall and Clarke.

_Productus nebraskensis_ Owen.

_Seminula argentia_ (Shepard) Hall.

_Aviculopecten occidentalis_ (Shumard) Meek and Hayden.

_Aviculopecten whitei_ Meek?

_Myalina congeneris_ Walcott?

_Myalina perattenuata_ Meek and Hayden.

_Myalina swallowi_ McChesney.

_Nucula?_ sp.

_Nuculana bellistriata attenuata_ Meek var.

_Pinna peracuta_ Shumard.

_Pleurophorus_ Cf. _angulatus_ Meek and Worthen.

_Pleurophorus tropidopherus_ Meek.

_Pseudomonotis hawni_ Meek.

_Sedgwickia topekensis_ (Shumard) Meek and Hayden.

_Bellerophon carbonarius_ Cox.

_Bellerophon marcouianus_ Geinitz.

_Dentalium meekianum_ Geinitz.

_Euomphalus subrugosus_ (Meek and Worthen) Meek.

_Gastropod_, minute, undetermined.

_Pleurotomaria subdecussata_ Geinitz.

_Ostracoda._

=29.= BARCLAY LIMESTONE. (Adams, MSS., by permission of U. S. Geological
Survey.) Base of the Wabaunsee formation. For the present it seems best
to group several strata in this formation.[9] They cannot well be mapped
on the scale of the U. S. folios, and they are also intimately connected
faunally, and usually all assist in producing a high escarpment with the
upper part retreating. The rocks aggregate about seventy feet in
thickness. The following section will serve to give an idea of these
rocks:

                                                                 ft. in.
 _g._ Gray, argillaceous, fossiliferous limestone, from 1 foot     2   0
        to
 _f._ Bluish calcareous shales with _Enteletes_, _Myalina_,       20   0
        _Allorisma_ and _Bellerophon_ fauna, from 8 feet to
 _e._ Hard, shelly, bluish limestone                               4   0
 _d._ Shales with thin limestones, varying from 21 feet to        40   0
 _c._ Hard gray limestone weathering light yellow, from 1½ feet    1   0
        to
 _b._ Thin layer of shale                                          0   6
 _a._ Massive yellowish-gray limestone, very hard, with but few    6   0
        fossils, from 4 to 7 feet thick, averaging about

Most all of the fossils listed below are from layers _e_, _f_, and _g_,
by far the greater part ranging through all three.

_Somphospongia multiformis_ Beede (from Robinson, Brown county).

_Aulacorhynchus millepunctatus_ (Meek and Worthen) Hall and Clarke?

_Derbya crassa_ (Meek and Hayden) Waagen.

_Dielasma bovidens_ (Morton) White.

_Enteletes hemiplicata_ (Hall) Hall and Clarke.

_Meekella striaticostata_ (Cox) White and St. John.

_Productus cora_ d’Orbigny.

_Productus punctatus_ (Martin) Morton.

_Seminula argentia_ (Shepard) Hall.

_Allorisma costatum_ Meek and Worthen.

_Allorisma geinitzi_ Meek.

_Allorisma granosum_ (Shumard) Meek.

_Allorisma subcuneatum_ Meek and Hayden.

_Allorisma_ sp.

_Aviculopecten occidentalis_ (Shumard) Meek and Hayden.

_Edmondia aspenwallensis_ Meek.

_Edmondia ovata_ Meek and Worthen.

_Edmondia_ cf. _nebraskensis_ Meek.

_Macrodon_ sp.

_Myalina perattenuata_ Meek and Hayden.

_Myalina subquadrata_ Shumard.

_Pinna peracuta_ Shumard.

_Pleurophorus_ sp.

_Pseudomonotis kansasensis_ Beede.

_Pseudomonotis hawni_ Meek and Hayden.

_Pseudomonotis_ cf. _robusta_ Beede.

_? Sedgwickia altirostrata_ Meek and Hayden.

_Bellerophon carbonarius_ Cox.

_Bellerophon marcouianus_ Geinitz.

_Bellerophon_ cf. _montfortianus_ Norwood and Pratten.

_Bellerophon percarinatus_ Conrad.

_Bulimorpha nitidula_ (Meek and Worthen) Keyes.

_Capulus_ sp.

_Soleniscus paludinæformis_ (Hall) White.

_Sphærodoma texana_ (Shumard) Keyes.

_Orthoceras_ sp.

_Tainoceras occidentalis_ (Swallow) Hyatt?

=30.= WILLARD SHALES. These shales are fifty-five feet thick in their
thinnest exposure, and are thicker in some places. Bennett gives their
thickness at Willard at from seventy-five to eighty-five feet, including
a thin stratum of limestone.[10] The Bennett collection contains the
following specimens taken from this thin limestone:

_Fusulina secalica_ (Say) Fischer.

_Meekella striaticostata_ (Cox) White and St. John.

_Productus semireticulatus_ (Martin) d’Orbigny.

_Bellerophon_ sp.

=31.= CHOCOLATE LIMESTONE. This name, as well as the one preceding and
the one following, are used merely for convenience here, as they have
been used before for the designation of these rocks, knowing that with
further study and careful tracing they will be found to be the
equivalents of similar rocks on the Neosho river section. This limestone
is buff brown in color, varying from seven to ten feet in thickness,
composed principally of two layers of massive stone, the upper of which
is composed largely of the large variety of _Fusulina secalica_. In the
Kansas river region it always forms high escarpments with rocky edges.
It is not rich in any fossils except the _Fusulinas_.

_Fusulina secalica_ (Say).

_Lophophyllum profundum_ (Milne-Edwards and Haime) Foerste.

_Chonetes granulifer_ Owen.

_Enteletes hemiplicata_ (Hall) Hall and Clarke.

_Meekella striaticostata_ (Cox) White and St. John.

_Productus cora_ d’Orbigny.

_Productus nebraskensis_ Owen.

_Seminula argentia_ (Shepard) Hall.

=32.= Shales and sandstones shown near Dover, eighty-five feet in
thickness, varying from light yellow to brownish red.

=33.= DOVER LIMESTONE. A limestone about four feet in thickness and of
grayish color.

=34.= Somewhere from forty to seventy feet of shales, with occasional
thin limestones with _Myalina perattenuata_.

=35.= Ten to twelve inches of very fossiliferous limestone in thin
layers. Numbers 32 to 35 are as exposed on Mission creek and its
tributaries near Dover. Number 35 is shown in ravines southwest of
Dover, in the high region east and south of Mission creek.

_Fenestella_ sp.

_Productus nebraskensis_ Owen.

_Aviculopecten maccoyi_ Meek and Hayden.

_Aviculopecten occidentalis_ (Shumard) Meek and Hayden.

_Edmondia_ sp.

_Limopteria marian_ (White) Beede.

_Myalina perattenuata_ Meek and Hayden.

_Myalina swallowi_ McChesney.

_Pseudomonotis hawni_ Meek and Hayden.

_Pseudomonotis_ cf. _kansasensis_ Beede.

_Schizodus_ sp.

_Schizodus_ sp.

_Gastropod_ cast.

_Loxonema_ sp.

_Pleurotomaria perhumerosa_ Meek.

=36.= Owing to lack of detailed study of the rocks from the last
described to the Cottonwood limestone, it will be necessary to combine
the less important strata into groups and mention only the more
important. It is a matter of regret that the rocks of this part of the
Kansas river section cannot be referred with certainty to the
corresponding rocks of the Neosho river and Cottonwood river sections,
which have been studied by various geologists. As near as I am able to
judge, No. 13 of Bennett’s Buffalo Mound section[11] corresponds to the
Americus limestone near Emporia.[12] All the rocks between No. 35 and
No. 13 of Bennett’s Buffalo Mound section are put under No. 36. They
consist of an alternation of thin limestones and shales. These shales
form a part, at least, of the “Olpe” shales of Dr. Geo. I. Adams (by
permission, from his MSS.)

=37.= No. 13 of Bennett’s Buffalo Mound section. Probably is the
equivalent of the Americus limestone before mentioned.

=38.= ELMDALE FORMATION. Prosser and Beede, MSS. Shales with occasional
thin limestones, quite fossiliferous in the lower portion. This is
probably the same horizon as No. 2 and No. 3, except the limestone at
the top, of Prosser’s Manhattan section.[13] It is also, in all
probability, the same horizon as No. 8 of my section on the South Fork
of the Black Vermillion river.[14] However, the fossils from the latter
place are given in a separate list. The thickness of these shales on the
Kansas river and Mill creek are from 111 to 118 feet. Grouping the Mill
creek and the Manhattan equivalents, we have the fossils of this horizon
as follows:

_Fusulina secalica_ (Say).

_Lophophyllum profundum_ (Milne-Edwards and Haime) Foerste.

_Chætetes?_ sp.

_Crinoid_ stems and plates.

_Archæocidaris_ sp.

_Archæocidaris_ sp.

_Dichotrypa subramosa_ Rogers, MSS.

_Fistulipora nodulifera_ Meek.

_Rhombopora lepidodendroides_ Meek.

_Septopora biserialis_ (Swallow) Foerste.

_Ambocœlia planoconvexa_ (Shumard) Hall and Clarke.

_Chonetes glaber_ Geinitz.

_Chonetes granulifer_ Owen.

_Crania modesta_ White?

_Derbya crassa_ (Meek and Hayden) Waagen.

_Dielasma bovidens_ (Morton) White.

_Enteletes hemiplicata_ (Hall) Hall and Clarke.

_Hustedia mormoni_ (Marcou) Hall and Clarke.

_Lingula umbonata_ Cox.

_Meekella striaticostata_ (Cox) White and St. John.

_Orbiculoidea manhattanensis_ (Meek and Hayden) Hall and Clarke.

_Productus cora_ d’Orbigny.

_Productus longispinus_ Sowerby.

_Productus nebraskensis_ Owen.

_Productus semireticulatus_ (Martin) d’Orbigny.

_Productus symmetricus_ McChesney.

_Pugnax utah_ (Marcou) Hall and Clarke.

_Rhipidomella pecosi_ (Marcou) Hall and Clarke.

_Seminula argentia_ (Shepard) Hall and Clarke.

_Spirifer cameratus_ Morton.

_Spiriferina cristata_ (Schlotheim) Dawson.

_Allorisma subcuneatum_ Meek and Hayden.

_Aviculopecten occidentalis_ (Swallow) Meek and Hayden.

_Nuculana bellistriata attenuata_ Meek var.

_Dawsonella meeki_ Brady? (Prosser’s identification.)

_Griffithides_ sp.


From about the same horizon on the South Fork of the Black Vermillion:

_Fusulina secalica_ (Say).

_Lophophyllum profundum_ (Milne-Edwards and Haime) Foerste.

_Dichotrypa subramosa_ Rogers, MSS.

_Fenestella limbata_ Foerste.

_Fistulipora nodulifera_ Meek.

_Septopora_ sp.

_Thamniscus octonarius_ Ulrich.

_Crinoid_ stems.

_Archæocidaris_ sp.

_Archæocidaris_ sp.

_Ambocœlia planoconvexa_ (Shumard) Hall and Clarke.

_Chonetes granulifer_ Owen.

_Derbya crassa_ (Meek and Hayden) Waagen.

_Hustedia mormoni_ (Marcou) Hall and Clarke.

_Meekella striaticostata_ (Cox) White and St. John.

_Productus cora_ d’Orbigny.

_Productus longispinus_ Sowerby.

_Productus nebraskensis_ Owen.

_Productus semireticulatus_ (Martin) d’Orbigny.

_Pugnax utah_ (Marcou) Hall and Clarke.

_Rhipidomella pecosi_ (Marcou) Hall and Clarke.

_Spirifer cameratus_ Morton.

_Allorisma subcuneata_ Meek and Hayden.

_Aviculopecten occidentalis_ (Shumard) Meek and Hayden.

_Chænomya_ sp.

_Pleurophorus whitei_ Beede.

_? Sedgwickia altirostrata_ Meek and Hayden.

_Euomphalus subrugosus_ (Meek and Worthen) Meek.

_Griffithides scitula_ (Meek and Hayden) Vogdes.

=39.= NEVA LIMESTONE. Prosser and Beede, MSS. This is the “dry bone”
limestone of Swallow.[15] It is a gray limestone six or eight feet in
thickness, in two layers, separated by a layer of shale. It weathers
very rough, from which fact Swallow called it the “dry bone” limestone.

=40.= ESKRIDGE SHALES. Prosser, MSS. About thirty feet of shales between
the above and the base of the Cottonwood limestone.

=41.= COTTONWOOD LIMESTONE. Six feet of light buff-gray limestone, in
two layers, the upper usually somewhat cherty, and filled with a small
form of _Fusulina secalica_ (Say). An excellent dimension stone, of wide
distribution. Fossils rare.

_Fusulina secalica_ (Say).

_Lophophyllum profundum_ (Milne-Edwards and Haime) Foerste.

_Archæocidaris_ sp.

_Cystodictia inequimarginata_ Rogers.

_Fenestella limbata_ Foerste.

_Fenestella remota_ Foerste.

_Fistulipora nodulifera_ Meek.

_Pinnatopora_ sp.

_Rhabdomeson americanus_ Rogers.

_Rhombopora lepidodendroides_ Meek.

_Septopora biserialis_ (Swallow) Foerste.

_Streblotrypa prisca_ Gabb and Horn.

_Chonetes granulifer_ Owen.

_Pinna_ sp.

_Griffithides scitula_ (Meek and Hayden) Vogdes.


 GEOLOGICAL LABORATORY, INDIANA UNIVERSITY,
                 JUNE 14, 1902.

-----

Footnote 1:

  In justice to Mr. Rogers, it should be stated that he did not see the
  proof of the first article and is not to blame for the very bad errors
  which it contains.

Footnote 2:

  Univ. Geol. Surv. Kans., III, pp. 93, 94, 1898.

Footnote 3:

  Univ. Geol. Surv. Kans., I, p. 116, 1896.

Footnote 4:

  “Deer Creek Limestone,” Univ. Geol. Surv. Kans., II, p. 117.

Footnote 5:

  Kans. Univ. Quart., III, p. 278, 1895.

Footnote 6:

  Univ. Geol. Surv. Kans., I, pp. 118, 119, 1896.

Footnote 7:

  Ibid., p. 394.

Footnote 8:

  Ibid., pp. 66, 67.

Footnote 9:

  For a more detailed description of these rocks, see Trans. Kans. Acad.
  Sci., XV, p. 30.

Footnote 10:

  Univ. Geol. Surv. Kans., I, pp. 119, 120, 1896.

Footnote 11:

  Ibid., p. 120.

Footnote 12:

  Ibid., p. 80. See, also, Smith, Bull. Geol. Lyon Co. (Kans.), Emporia,
  1901.

Footnote 13:

  Bull. Geol. Soc. Amer., VI, p. 33.

Footnote 14:

  Kans. Univ. Quart., IX, p. 193, 1901. (For July, 1900.)

Footnote 15:

  See discussion in Bull. Geol. Soc. Amer., VI, p. 33 and p. 36.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. Silently corrected obvious typographical errors and variations in
      spelling.
 2. Retained archaic, non-standard, and uncertain spellings as printed.
 3. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
 4. Enclosed bold font in =equals=.
